Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome
User Experience Technology Manager,
John Galenzi.
Well, good afternoon.
Welcome to session 142.
This is one of many of the sessions
here at the conference on the
Aqua user experience in Mac OS X.
And this session really is,
as I said on Monday in
the Aqua overview session,
is really the mirror session of that one.
And this one presents the material
from the Aqua overview session
really from an API point of view,
so from the programmer's point of view.
Speaking through all of the
material that was presented
in the Aqua overview session,
item by item,
and telling you how to implement these
things within your apps as a developer.
So to walk you through this content,
I'd like to bring on stage Guy Fullerton,
a member of the high-level
toolbox engineering team at Apple.
So Aqua is the next generation
user experience for Mac OS.
But it's more than just a whole bunch
of pretty pictures on the screen.
It's behaviors, it's functionality,
and it's your entire
experience when using Mac OS X.
And the key for you as developers is
that Aqua is not complete until your
applications take advantage of it,
until we have lots of applications on
the system that take advantage of it.
So I'm going to show you the
steps that are required for
your application to aquify.
And it's really not a
very difficult process.
A lot of the functionality, the toolbox,
and lower-level system services
will do for you automatically.
I'll also show you how to avoid certain
problem areas when you're doing your
code and aquifying your application.
And lastly,
I hope to give you some kind of
level of insight into exactly
why Aqua is the way it is,
so that when your application
needs to do some sort of
custom user interface element,
you can better match the
rest of the Aqua experience.
So the most striking thing
about Aqua when you first see
it is probably the windows.
They're obviously drastically
different from Mac OS 9 in appearance.
And there's several cool technology
features that we've built
into Mac OS X that make using
Windows much more of a pleasure.
One thing about Windows that may not
necessarily be obvious the first time
you start using Mac OS X is the fact
that we have a brand new layering model.
On Mac OS 9,
when you select an application,
either by clicking on one of its
windows or choosing it from the
application menu or something like that,
all of that application's
windows come to the foreground.
On Mac OS X, we don't have that behavior.
When you click on an
application's window,
just that one window
comes to the foreground.
This is beneficial for a couple reasons.
The main reason it's beneficial in
any case is that users have a very
document-centric way of working,
and this facilitates it very easily.
So there's a couple things as application
developers you need to be aware of
with respect to this functionality.
The first is that because just one of
your windows can come to the front most,
And that does bring your
application to the foreground,
but just because your
application is at the foreground,
you can't assume that all
your windows are visible.
If you have some sort of status window,
you might want to bring that
forward in addition to just the
one window the user clicked on.
Similarly,
the Toolbox will automatically bring
all of your application's floating
windows to the foreground when any one
of your windows comes to the front.
And to make it easier on your lives,
your window list has not
changed at all in this model.
You will only see your windows in the
window list and you won't have to watch
out for any other applications' windows.
And if your user does want to bring all
of your app's windows to the foreground,
there's a couple mechanisms to do that.
I'll talk about one a
little bit later on,
but they can always click on your
applications icon on the Doc to
bring everything forward at once.
So Mac OS X automatically double
buffers your window content for you.
This has several cool advantages.
The first is a user advantage,
and that is that drawing
appears very snappy.
If you create a Mac OS 9 window,
just a normal Mac OS 9 window,
and you don't go through any
effort of double buffering it,
and you make individual quick
draw calls or appearance primitive
calls or other calls that draw,
you'll see each individual draw
operation take place one after the other,
and it looks kind of clunky.
Well, on Mac OS X we automatically
redirect the drawing into the
off-screen buffer for that window,
or what you can think of
as an off-screen buffer,
and then later that gets blit to
the screen all in one fell swoop.
It has a very crisp,
snappy appearance to it.
Additionally,
the fact that we buffer windows
lets us take advantage of Quartz
in really cool ways to do shadow
compositing or translucency
effects and things like that.
So, like I mentioned,
when you're drawing with
Quick Draw on Mac OS 9,
individual graphics operations
take place one at a time.
And on 10,
they still take place one at a time,
but they write to some off-screen buffer.
Typically,
your application does not need to
manage that buffer and the timing that's
used to transfer it to the screen.
The Toolbox does that for you
in probably 99% of the cases.
When you do some drawing and
then you re-enter the event loop,
we will automatically flush all the
windows that need to be flushed.
If you do have some cases in
your application where sort of
intermediate frames of the drawing
might make sense to display or if
you're doing some kind of animation
without calling into the event loop,
you can always manually flush by
using the QD Flush Port Buffer API.
So on Mac OS X, we automatically turn
on buffering for you.
And in this case,
we've got an API called QDIsPortBuffered,
and this tells you when
a given port is buffered.
I'll get to something else in a second.
So essentially what this means
is now that we're automatically
doing an off-screen buffer for you,
if your application on Mac OS 9 was
doing its own off-screening or own
double buffering through GWorlds,
you don't need to execute
that code on Mac OS X.
So you want to use the QDsportBuffered
API when it returns true to
conditionally turn off your
own GWorld support for your Windows.
Additionally, each buffer for a window
has its own device depth,
and the Windows Server in Quartz
will automatically do the dithering
if it happens to be rendered to
a device that has a lower bit
depth than the Quartz buffer.
So you don't even need to
bother doing device loop when
you're running on Mac OS X.
On Mac OS 9, of course,
we don't do any automatic buffering.
So it might behoove you to leave
your GWorld drawing code in there
and conditionalize it just to run on
Mac OS 9 using the QD isPortBuffered API.
You'll also want a device loop on
Mac OS 9 just like you always have.
It'll make sure you draw
properly across all devices.
I should make another note that
the QD flush port buffer API,
even though it does nothing on Mac OS 9,
is still perfectly safe to call.
So one of the ways we take advantage
of Quartz is through window shadowing.
Window shadowing is important
for a number of reasons,
one of which is the fact that
unlike Mac OS 9 Platinum windows,
an Aqua window does not have a
thick border around the edge,
and the window shadow is one of
the ways you can help differentiate
the edges of your windows.
This also lets us do
cool usability features,
like the fact that the frontmost
window actually has a darker,
deeper shadow than the rest of the
windows in your application to make
it stand out a little bit better.
But not all windows
necessarily need shadows.
You might have a case in your application
where you're displaying a window.
For instance,
if you've got a scroll bar and you pop
up a little window that displays the page
number that the user will have scrolled
to when they log into the scroll bar,
it may not make sense to
display a shadow on that window.
So you can turn off
the shadow in two ways.
The first way is by calling create
new window to build that window.
If you pass in the no shadow attribute,
of course we're going to create a
window that doesn't have a shadow.
The second way does not work yet on DP4,
but by the time we ship the
final version of Mac OS X,
it will work.
We have a change window attributes
API that's been around since I think
Mac OS 8.5 that allows you to dynamically
turn on and off certain window features,
and the shadowing will
be one such feature.
Now the fact that we have your
Windows buffer means we can do other cool
things like drag the window around live.
Of course,
this will only work if you call the
standard Toolbox Drag Window API.
A lot of you have custom
dragging code for your windows,
typically implemented with drag
ray region or direct drawing to
the screen and doing your own
pattern XORing and stuff like that.
That won't work on X.
First off,
because drag ray region will not
have the behavior you expect.
We'll go into a little bit more detail on
that on the Carbon enhancement sessions.
Drawing to the screen just
really doesn't work on Mac OS X.
In DP4,
there are ways to get it to kind of work,
but it's not going to draw to the buffer,
so it's just not going to work out,
and I'd say avoid it.
If you do need some
custom dragging behavior,
you can always take advantage
of Carbon events and hook into
the drag window functionality
to do certain custom dragging.
So of course another real cool
feature of Mac OS X is the Dock.
And as you've seen,
Windows can minimize down to the Dock.
The Toolbox tries to do as much
of this work for you as possible.
In fact,
it's basically free for your application.
Any document window,
which is one that has
the collapsible bit,
the collapsible attribute
turned on for it,
will automatically minimize down to the
Dock when you click the Collapse box.
Now in Mac OS 8, I believe,
we introduced the Collapse
Window suite of APIs,
which worked with Mac OS 8's
window shading behavior.
The Collapse Window API allowed you to
window shade and unwindow shade windows.
So in Mac OS X,
we're reusing these APIs to
do the minimization process.
Additionally,
calling Select Window on a window
that happens to be minimized will
un-minimize it from the Dock and bring
it to the front in one operation.
So when a window is minimized,
there's a couple of things
you need to be aware of.
The first is that the
window is still visible.
This has several key advantages.
If a window is minimized in the dock,
say a progress window,
you can continually update
the progress window.
And if the user clicks on the
dock to unminimize the window,
it'll unminimize immediately
in its currently drawn state,
which is good.
Also, it's still in your window list,
so you need to be aware of that.
We have an isWindowCollapsed API,
which has, again,
been around since Mac OS 8.
If it's true,
your window is in a minimized state.
There might be certain functionality
in your application that you'll want to
turn off for certain minimized windows.
For instance, if you have a Windows menu
with an arrange or tiling item,
you probably don't want to arrange
or tile your minimized windows.
It'll look kind of odd to
the user if there's a hole in
the arranging that you did.
The Dock doesn't just show
minimized windows in it.
It also shows application icons or
possibly documents you've added to it.
And of course you're going to want
a good icon for your application to
show in the Dock when it's running.
Now the Dock uses
128-bit by 128-bit icons,
which are obviously much
bigger than the 32 by 32 icons.
If you don't provide a 128 by 128 icon,
we'll take your 32 by
32 icon and scale it up.
And as you've seen in some of the demos,
it can look kind of clunky and it really
doesn't give your app a good feel to it.
So we're going to talk more about
this in two different sessions.
There's an application packaging
session and an icon services session.
The icon services session will tell
you how to build up the icon ref,
the 128 by 128 icon ref.
And the application packaging session
will show you how to stick that
into your application's bundle.
So, obviously the menus in Aqua went
through a visual transformation,
but there's a more subtle
transformation that we did that really
increases the usability of Aqua,
and that is a little bit
of menu bar reorganization.
Under Mac OS 9,
Mac OS 9 obviously has
a very long history,
and so commands kept getting
added to it and added to it.
And after time, it became kind of clunky,
and things aren't necessarily
arranged in the best possible way.
So in Aqua, we tried to rectify that.
The leftmost menu in the menu
bar is the application menu.
This is the menu in which you
put all of the commands that
only pertain to your application.
As you can see, Quit and About,
things like preferences and
the Hide and Show items.
Building an application menu is something
you'll all recognize as familiar.
From a resource standpoint,
it's essentially just an Apple menu.
Create a normal Apple menu which has
the Apple character as its title.
Put your About item in it
just like you always have.
Put a separator in it
On Mac OS 9,
when you're running on CarbonLib,
we detect the Apple menu.
We automatically populate
it with Apple menu items,
and we even handle all
the selections for you.
When you run on Mac OS X,
we do a couple different things.
First off, we populate it with all the
standard application menu items:
Quit, Hide, Show, Preferences,
and all those.
Secondly,
we change the name of the application
menu to be that of your application.
Now, a lot of today's applications
have very long names.
You know, you've got a company name,
the actual app name,
typically a version number on it.
That whole string is not appropriate
to throw into the application menu.
But by default, the toolbox will.
So,
we've come up with a scenario so that you
can actually create a short version of
your application's name specifically for
stuffing into the application menu title.
And this is by one item in your
application bundle's info P list.
We'll talk more about that at the
application packaging session as well.
Now, if you don't provide one
of these short names,
we'll take your application's
long name and truncate it,
probably some place in the middle where
it doesn't necessarily make sense.
So, you really need to provide a short
application name if your application
name is at all non-trivial.
So, like I mentioned on CarbonLib,
we handle most application menu
selections for you automatically.
But when your app needs
to do a few other things,
you need to handle your About item
the way you always have,
but then again,
you already have code to do that,
so that's no change.
We added a Quit and
Preferences item to it,
but it's your responsibility
to handle those items.
When a user chooses the Quit item
from the application menu,
we'll send you a standard
Quit application Apple event.
Handle that the way you always would,
you know, bring up your Save/Don't
Save dialogs and shut down your
application as appropriate.
When they choose the Preferences item,
we send you a brand new Apple event
called Show Preferences.
When you receive this Apple event,
you'll want to obviously
display your preferences.
Everything else in the application menu
is handled automatically right now.
We deal with the hide and
show items automatically.
The services isn't quite wired up yet,
and we'll have more
details on that later.
Now a lot of applications have
either complex preferences,
or they have plugins
which need preferences,
or they might even have just multiple
preferences items for historical sake.
We made the Preferences menu
customizable so that you could
add multiple Preferences items
or even delete it if you need to.
The Preferences item in
the Application menu has a
command ID associated with it.
It's all lowercase, p-r-e-f,
just like you would expect.
and you can find the position of
that item in the Preferences menu
by using a new Menu Manager API.
In fact, we have a whole suite of new
Menu Manager APIs that are designed
to let you deal with menu commands,
menu items, sorry, on a command basis.
You can find them, hide them, show them,
things of that nature.
So once you've found
the Preferences item,
you might want to change its name,
you might want to hide it,
you might want to add other items,
but you can customize
it however you need to.
The next menu over in the
menu bar is the File menu.
This hasn't changed a whole lot,
but it's important to
understand what it's for now.
It's the place that you put all of
your document-specific commands.
There should be nothing that pertains
only to the application here,
or stuff that contains
the document content.
So as you can see,
the File menu no longer
has a "quit" command.
Now the last menu we'd like
everyone to adopt is a window menu.
This window menu becomes
particularly important now that we
have a different layering model.
If your windows are intermingled
with another application's windows,
it's important to offer an easy
way to the user to get at the
other windows in your application.
And of course if you add this,
it'll show up in your
CarbonLib versions as well,
and I'm sure your users will
find it useful there as well.
Unfortunately, we don't have an automatic
window menu support,
but we're looking at what
it'll take to do that.
So for the time being,
if your application does not
already have a window menu,
you just need to add a few standard
commands to it and then add one item
for every window in your application.
If the user chooses one of the items
that pertains to one of your windows,
just call Select Window to
bring it forward.
One of the standard commands
is Minimize Command,
and when the user chooses Minimize,
you should collapse the frontmost window.
The other standard command
is Bring All to Front.
If they choose that,
you want to bring all of your
application windows to front,
obviously, and you do that by calling
Set Front Process on your
application's process serial number.
This is also a really good place to put
any tiling or arranging functionality
if you offer that in your application.
So, all right,
you've just laid out your menus for Aqua.
Well, what should they look like when
they're running on Mac OS 9?
Well, the answer is they should
look like Mac OS 9 menus.
The file menu should still contain
the quick command and your preferences
item should be wherever you normally
put it in your Mac OS 9 product.
To facilitate this,
we've added a bit to the
menu manager's gestalt.
That's the Aqua layout bit.
If you see this bit turned on,
you want to change the way
your menus are laid out.
Of course, there's a number of different
ways you can do that.
You might have a set of different
mbar and menu resources in your app
and change which one you load based
on whether or not the bit is set.
Alternatively,
you can go ahead and leave the quick
command in your file menu and remove
it when you're running under Aqua,
or maybe dynamically add it
if you're running on Mac OS 9,
or do whatever you need to do.
You also conditionally want to
move your preferences item around.
So before I go any further,
I want to give you a demo that's
not exactly related to Aqua,
but I've got some ulterior motives,
so bear with me.
So if I can get the demo machine.
I've just got a very
simple application here,
and I don't know if it's shown up
very well in some of the other demos,
but Aqua menus are transparent.
You might have seen that before.
But we've been working on the
menu manager a little bit.
Besides just adding some APIs to
deal with the command IDs,
we've also added dynamic menu support.
So while I've got this menu pulled down,
I can change the modifier
keys that I hold down,
and it changes the items
that are displayed.
I'd like to go back to slides.
So between those two facts
and the fact that in Mac OS 8
with the Appearance Manager,
we also introduced a whole bunch of new
menu item glyphs and the full keyboard
command suite-- you can assign control,
option, shift, and those things to your
menu command modifiers.
Between all those features,
there's basically no reason
not to adopt the system menu
def for your text-based menus.
That, in fact, is the only way to get
translucency for your menus.
Right now, translucency is not
supported in custom MDEFs.
And of course,
when you adopt the standard MDEF,
you're going to have maximum
future compatibility as well.
So in my opinion,
the absolute best feature
of Aqua is Sheets.
This is the way modality
always should have been.
Sheets are a way to associate an
individual dialog or alert directly
to the document which it applies.
And this is probably the individual
hardest thing to implement for Aqua,
but even as such, it's not very hard.
The Toolbox tries to take care of as
much work for you as it possibly can.
We run the Genie effect,
we deal with the document modality,
and we also deal with
the window grouping.
When a sheet's pulled down on a window,
you can actually click the
document window and move both
the window and the sheet around.
So the work you have to do, like I said,
is very simple and it's four basic steps.
The steps you're pretty much
used to for all your normal
Windows with a slight twist.
To create a sheet,
use the Create New Window API,
and just tell it, "Hey,
it's a sheet class window." All right,
that gives you the sheet.
But before you can actually display it,
there's one thing you need to do.
In the Carbon event session,
we mentioned how a lot of our new
functionality was only going to
be accessible via Carbon events,
and this is one of those
pieces of new functionality.
When a Genie Effect is about to run,
we need to show the window and have the
windows image ready immediately so we can
run the Genie Effect with the real bits.
In order to do that,
we need your application to
respond to the K event window
draw contents apple event.
Sorry, Carbon event.
You simply do this by
installing the event handler.
And when you receive the event,
do your normal window drawing.
You can call draw controls or draw
whatever custom content you need to.
and so we'll send you this event,
we'll have your bits already ready,
and we will run the Genie
effect and spin your window out.
So to actually run the Genie
effect and show the window,
you call Show Sheet Window.
This window is just like
Show Window except it
takes an extra parameter,
and that parameter is the document
window to which it applies.
This API does a couple things.
First, it associates the sheet
with its document.
It'll run the Genie effect,
and then it sets up the system to
deal with the proper modality of
that sheet to just its document.
The other important thing to note
is this API returns immediately,
just like Show Window.
It doesn't put you into some sort of
funky modal state and we only exit
after the user's done with the Genie.
That doesn't happen.
Show Window returns immediately,
and your application must continue
with its normal event processing.
And it's just that:
normal event processing.
You'll receive events for the sheet just
like you would for any other window,
and you can handle them just
like for any other window.
And if you want to take advantage
of Carbon events to make your
life a little bit easier,
you can do that too.
So the user interacts with your sheet
for a while and ultimately they're
going to click a button or do something
in the sheet that means dismiss it.
And to get rid of the sheet and
thereby animate the Genie effect,
you call Hide Sheet Window.
This also unbinds the
sheet from its document.
And like any other window,
you just dispose it when
you're finished with it.
Alternatively,
you could keep it around for a later
use of Show Sheet Window if you want.
So the vast majority of Sheet
use is usually very simple.
You'll typically want to do save dialogs,
print dialogs, or custom alerts and
things of that nature.
And we've offered a standard
alert API for a little while now,
and we made an equivalent
of that using Sheets,
and it's called Create Standard Sheet.
So Create Standard Sheet has mostly
the same parameters as Standard Alert.
You can customize the message text,
the explanation text,
you can customize the
buttons a little bit.
The one difference is
that Create Standard Sheet
takes an Event Target Ref.
An Event Target Ref is one
of the Carbon Event objects
to which events can be sent.
This target is particularly
important because when the
sheet is ultimately dismissed,
we are going to send the event
telling you what the user clicked
directly to that event target.
So you create your Sheet window,
you call Show Sheet window,
and from that point on,
it's handled automatically.
Create Standard Sheet will automatically
install enough Carbon Event Handlers
onto the Sheet window such that
all of the event processing for
that Sheet is handled for you.
You won't receive any events for
that Sheet via Waitnext Event.
So when the user manipulates the sheet
and finally clicks one of the buttons,
the Create Standard Sheet API set
up some stuff so that we will call
Hide Sheet Window for you automatically.
And then we send a particular
Carbon event to the event
target you provided.
It'll be OK, Cancel, or Other,
depending on whatever
button the user clicked.
So the navigation services and
printing teams have come up with a
new suite of APIs to let you take
advantage of their dialog services
in such a way that they use Sheets.
You should definitely check out the
sessions that they discuss this at
to find out all the details there.
But in general,
they try to make your lives as
easy as possible and do as much
of the work for you as possible.
So one of the other major changes
with Aqua is the system font.
We're now drawing with Lucida.
And in fact,
it's even a little bit bigger
than you might be expecting.
On Mac OS 9,
the system font was charcoal.
Before that, it was Chicago.
But in both cases, it was 12-point.
The system font in Lucida is 13-point.
The small system font is 11-point.
And additionally,
there's a few cases where we
render the font with special
effects in certain cases.
The push button, for example,
has a slight shadow,
as does the window title.
And in fact,
the window title is rendered in 14-point.
So there's a few nuances there.
So despite the fact that
Lucida has a larger point size,
it still has the overall same
metrics as Charcoal or Chicago.
I think Charcoal and Chicago have
a 16-point overall line height.
Lucida is roughly equivalent,
definitely does not go over 16.
Similarly, the small system font has an
overall line height of 13 points.
One important fact to
note is that Lucida is,
on average, a little bit larger,
a little bit longer than
Charcoal or Chicago,
so you might need to take care there.
Of course,
your applications are going to want
to use AquaText wherever they can.
If you use the standard system controls,
windows, and menus,
we're going to take care of
all that for you automatically.
But I know your applications
do a lot of custom drawing.
We've implemented a suite of
Appearance Manager Aqua-savvy
Theme Text Drawing APIs.
They actually build upon some
earlier Appearance Manager technology
using the Theme Font IDs.
This was a set of meta
fonts you could request,
like "Just let me use the system font,"
or "Just let me use the small system
font," or "The small bold system font."
So this suite of APIs lets you draw
or measure or truncate any number of
these meta fonts in an Aqua-savvy way.
And in order to make your lives easier,
we've tried to make these APIs relatively
equal to the Quick Draw Text APIs that
you've grown to know and love.
We have an equivalent
to the TE Text Box API,
we have an equivalent to String Width,
we have an equivalent to Trunk String,
and those things.
So Aqua obviously changed all
the widgets and all the controls,
so they have a brand new look.
In addition,
we've added a few new controls and added
some features to some of the older ones.
So I know you saw slide
changes on the previous slide,
and I should go into
some background here.
So in DP3, when everybody first saw Aqua,
the controls were much bigger
than they were in Platinum.
I think push buttons were
around 26 pixels tall,
pop-ups were maybe 24.
Everything in general was larger.
And we heard a lot of
feedback about that.
You told us that it was going to be very
difficult to relay out all your dialogs.
And we took that feedback to heart.
And so now in DP4, all of the controls
are basically the same,
use basically the same metrics
as their Platinum equivalents.
The heights for the controls
are mostly maintained.
There are a few cases where we
won't shrink below a certain size.
For instance, you can't create a push
button that's six pixels tall.
That kind of defeats the purpose.
And a few controls' widths
do increase slightly.
There's a number of reasons for this.
Like I mentioned before,
Lucida as a system font is slightly
wider than Charcoal and Chicago.
So if you're using static text items
or if you have certain controls
that have a lot of text in them,
you might find that you need to widen
it a little bit to show it on the
same number of lines you used to be.
Additionally, a few of the controls,
like push buttons,
have a more rounded appearance.
The end caps on Platinum push
buttons were practically square,
so you could cram a lot more
text onto the button image.
But an Aqua one is more rounded,
and if you start cramming the text on,
the text might write off the edge.
So you'll probably need to widen your
dialogs or widen the items out in your
dialogs and controls a little bit.
But to help...
So we didn't want to wreck your
investment in your dialog layout,
so we tried to make it such that
your layout effort was about
equal to a localization effort,
but not more than that.
And the other benefit is that if you
take a dialog that you've implemented
to look really good in Platinum,
and you relay it all out for Aqua,
and you take that same dialog and
run it back on Platinum again,
it's still going to look good.
So you should be able to get away
with just having one set of dialog and
control resources for your application.
So I mentioned before that we've
got a number of new controls,
and I'd like to take you
through them one by one.
So the first one's the round button.
You've probably seen this either in
the Finder or in the Help Viewer.
It's generally used as
a navigation button,
you know, forward, backwards, home,
things of that nature.
And you can customize its
content through an icon ref.
Of course, we have a new creation
API for this one as well.
We're adding a whole slew of new
creation APIs for all the controls.
We'll go into details on that in
the Carbon enhancement session.
But we've got one for the round
button to make your life easier.
You may not have seen the
disclosure button before.
This right now is only showing
up in the open and save panels.
It's used to, for lack of better words,
expand and contract the dialog.
If you click it when the
dialog is in its small state,
it expands to the large state,
giving you more information.
Got a creation API for that one.
So when we introduced Mac OS 8,
we introduced a progress bar control.
And that was really cool.
People used it for progress.
But other people started using
it for relevance ranking,
including our own products.
Sherlock used it for its relevance
ranking indicator in searches.
But we redesigned the
progress bar for Aqua,
and its appearance really isn't
suitable anymore as a relevance ranker.
So we've introduced a new
control called a relevance bar,
and it's perfectly suited
for relevance ranking.
We use it in Sherlock, obviously.
While I've got this slide up,
the bottom half of that Sherlock window
is another new control we're adding.
It's not just an Aqua control,
but it's also available on Mac OS 9.
It's called the Data Browser,
and we have a complete session on that.
It is a super list manager replacement,
or you can think of it that way.
It's a totally modern control that's
both Aqua-savvy and Platinum-savvy.
It does all the list management
and UI that you would ever want,
draws those header buttons,
deals with the shadowing effect
underneath the header buttons,
and all that wonderful stuff.
So like I mentioned,
we've had the Progress Bar for
quite some time now,
but I've seen some apps that
still didn't realize that.
It's been available since Mac OS 8,
but there are still applications
out there that use the old
fill-rec technique to do progress.
It's going to look
really crummy under Aqua,
so please, please, please start using the
Progress Bar control.
If you can't use the
Progress Bar control,
we have an appearance primitive
to make your life easier.
Keep in mind that right now there
is no way to get the appearance
primitive to animate the way
the Progress Bar does on Aqua.
The actual, sorry,
the actual Progress Bar control
is the only way to get animation
of the Progress Bar on Aqua.
So a few of the controls
you've grown to know and love
have been enhanced slightly.
Sliders and scroll bars support a new
feature which is called Scroll to Here.
Scroll to Here works such that
if you click in the page up or
page down area of the scroll bar,
the thumb jumps automatically
to that location.
You can start tracking the
thumb from that location.
Likewise, for sliders,
you can click in the middle of
the slider track and the thumb
will jump automatically there.
Of course,
if you don't like that behavior,
you can always option click in the
track and you'll get the same behavior
you're used to on normal Mac OS.
And I believe there's a preference in
the preferences application that allows
you to toggle the default setting.
Now, Scroll to Hear is only available for
live tracking variants of the controls.
There's a couple
technical reasons for it,
but in general, just start using the live
tracking variants of the controls.
This is good for a couple reasons.
Not only do you get the
Scroll to Hear behavior,
but also you're going to fit
in a little bit better with
the overall Aqua experience,
which is about providing immediate
live feedback to the user.
It's much more satisfying if you can
click on a scroll bar and start scrolling
it and see the content move immediately.
So please, please,
please use the live variants.
If you had a chance to play
with any dialogs under Aqua,
you've seen that our default button
no longer has a ring around it.
Instead, it pulses.
This happens automatically when
you use the push button control,
so long as that push button control
has been tagged as the default button.
There's a couple ways to do that.
The setDialogDefaultItem API is one way,
and that API has been
around for a long time.
If you have a dialog,
the simplest way is to just
use setDialogDefaultItem.
If you don't have a dialog,
there's actually two options.
The first and most high-level option
is to call setWindowDefaultButton.
You can call that on
any button in a window.
You should obviously only call it on the
one button you intend to be the default.
Alternatively,
you can call setControlData with a
special tag and some special data on
an individual control to do it as well.
But in general,
it's easier to just stick to the dialog
and the window versions of the APIs.
So one important note I should make
about default buttons is that a lot
of your application code tends to
depend on the old behavior of the
toolbox in Mac OS 8 and Mac OS 9 where
we patch quick draw to determine if
you're calling frame around rect.
And when we see that around a control,
we go and we tag it as a default button
automatically behind your back for you.
And that was intended to allow
you to transition to the platinum
appearance a little bit easier.
But you know on Mac OS X,
you can't patch and we're in
the same boat as you guys.
So we can't patch quick draw anymore.
And if you're calling frame around
rect around your default button,
you're going to get around rect
around your default button.
It's going to look kind of bad.
As I mentioned before,
the progress bar now animates.
This is good because it gives the user
a better indication that your machine
is actually live and still running,
even if your progress bar isn't updating.
Maybe it's hit a snag in the internet
connection if you're downloading
a file or something like that.
It still gives the user some feedback.
So the appearance manager under Aqua,
to a certain extent, had to be gutted and
rewritten from scratch.
We did this so that we could take
advantage of the cool drawing
services that Quartz provides.
And additionally,
we obviously needed to offer some
new APIs to your applications so
that you could render your widgets
manually using--in an Aqua-savvy way.
And I give you one example of that
before and that was the Theme Text APIs.
We've got a few others as well.
So the new controls that we're
offering are obviously backed
by new appearance primitives.
And if there isn't a primitive that
directly applies to that control,
we've probably enhanced
Draw Theme Button to take care
of that particular widget.
There are a number of new theme
button kinds that are used
with the Draw Theme Button API.
One particularly interesting constant
is the KThemeListHeaderButton.
Right now,
that's the only way to draw a list header
button the way you see in Data Browser,
in the Finder, in Sherlock.
We don't offer a control to do that yet.
Hopefully,
Data Browser will serve your needs,
but if you do find some needs,
if you do find it necessary to
draw those buttons on your own,
we can probably do some
kind of control for you.
Just let me know.
Of course, we have theme button constants
for all the standard controls,
all the new standard
controls I just showed you,
like the round button and the disclosure
button and things of that nature.
So on Mac OS 8.5,
we threatened to start doing
themes with patterns in them.
But we didn't really
follow through with that.
Well,
now we followed through with it in Aqua.
We actually have theme brushes that
don't just represent RGB colors.
They represent patterns.
And if you want to draw backgrounds
of either dialogues or windows
or certain controls like tabs and
placards in a theme savvy way,
you'll need to use these theme brushes.
Additionally,
if you're trying to save and restore the
graphics environment around a call to,
say, draw theme button,
you'll need to use some APIs we added in
Mac OS 8.5 dealing with drawing states.
These drawing state APIs are a
encapsulated way to save and restore
and normalize the drawing state in a
way that's completely pattern savvy.
So I suggest you start
adopting these immediately.
If you find that your application
comes up and patterns aren't
quite aligned right or don't
look quite the right color,
it may actually be the necessity for your
code to adopt these drawing state APIs.
So this is it.
This is your chance.
Your application could be the
first one of its class to go out
and adopt the Aqua interface.
And that would mean that that's the
one customers are clamoring for,
because everybody wants to use
the cool new stuff on Mac OS X.
And we've tried to make that as
easy as possible for you to adopt.
Of course,
if you use the standard system menus,
controls, and dialogs,
you're going to get most
of this stuff for free.
If you're already that far, great.
You only have a couple of the
steps you'll need to take.
The obvious choices are taking advantage
of Sheets in any way you possibly can.
You'll want to use Nav Services and
Printing and their Sheet support.
If you have custom Sheet support,
you can use the Sheet APIs we're
introducing directly in the toolbox.
And then you want to relay out for
Aqua to make your stuff look good.
Most importantly is probably
the menu bar layout,
so that you can give the user an
overall good experience and an
intuitive sense of where to find
the right items in the menu bar.
And then you want to relay
out your dialogs to look good
with the new Aqua metrics.
So with that,
I'd like to bring up John Glunze to lead
us through the roadmap and some Q&A.
Thanks, Guy.
So there's quite a few sessions
that kind of relate to this stuff,
not specifically to these APIs,
but that relate to other Aqua APIs or
other Mac OS X APIs that affect
sort of the user experience.
One is already passed,
which is the Aqua Overview 140.
Using Interface Builder is...
Interface Builder is a great tool for
prototyping your applications on 10
and getting the right look under Aqua.
Guy referred to Data Browser for
this list manager on steroids,
so to speak.
Control that you can build into your
applications and get finder-like
lists and that type of behavior,
that's in the Data Browser session.
Icon Services in Aqua 147 on Thursday.
That's a session you need to go to
to learn how to create great icons,
take advantage of Icon Services APIs to
show those icons at different sizes,
et cetera.
Navigation Services is... Talks about
the open and save dialogs and new APIs in
that regard and finding out how to do
the proper open and save dialogs under
9 and 10 with the new APIs that are there
and getting the right look and feel,
sheets, et cetera,
for opening and opening of files.
Apple Help, again,
like I said in other sessions,
HTML Help is the way to
go with help on Mac OS X.
So that's the session you need to go to,
and we're going to talk about help APIs,
but also how to author the
HTML Help in the right way.
Application Packaging
and Document Typing,
Session 144.
It's not so much about the
visual user experience of Aqua,
but it relates to the
Packaging Model on Mac OS X is
a user experience related issue.
You also need to know about the
new document typing and file naming
conventions that are on X and how
that affects you and your users
and your application development.
This session will cover
Carbon Enhancements 1 and
Carbon Enhancements 2,
which will go into more depth
on some of the APIs that Guy has
talked about and other APIs in
Mac OS X that affect the user
experience that you're going to deliver.
And then of course the
Aqua Feedback Forum,
which we're really looking forward to
and we're going to invite you to attend.
As well as the High-Level Toolbox
Feedback Forum for giving Guy and his
team and the High-Level Toolbox team
feedback on the High-Level Toolbox.
Those are the sessions that you
should think about attending and
we would encourage you to attend.
Who do you contact for more
assistance as a developer?
First of all, myself,
if you need assistance in understanding
Aqua or understanding how to do an
application that really is going
to take advantage of the rich,
elegant user experience of Aqua,
please get in touch with me.
Specific to APIs,
I would say that you should contact Guy.
If you have API issues,
if you have requests for new
APIs under Carbon or changes to
APIs or those sorts of things,
the other contact is David Wright.
Both of us are in the Worldwide
Developer Relations Organization and
we'd encourage you to contact
us with developer related
issues around this topic.
So I'd like to invite the High-Level
Toolbox team up on stage for the Q&A.